Document custom environments (#201)
NASA-IMPACT/veda-docs: nasa-veda-platform/scientific-computing/custom-environments.qmd

---
title: How to use a custom environment in the VEDA JupyterHub
---

> The VEDA JupyterHub lists a few *pre-built environments* (Docker images) as
> **Server Options** intended to cover most users' needs.  However, since it is
> impossible to cover every scenario, there are two options for choosing a *custom
> environment*:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The VEDA JupyterHub lists a few pre-configured environments (collections of Python or R libraries and/or other software) as **Server Options** intended to cover most common geospatial data science needs. These
are effectively pre-built Docker images ready for users to launch.

If you need a different configuration, there are two options for launching a *custom
environment*:
```

## Environment: Other

If you are aware of an existing pre-built, *publicly accessible Docker image* that
meets your needs, on the **Server Options** page, open the **Environment**
drop-down list, choose **Other...**, and specify the public identifier of the
image in the **Custom image** field.

For example, if a Modified Pangeo Notebook environment were not already one of
the pre-built environments listed, you could use the standard, publicly
available Pangeo Notebook image yourself, like so:

![Specifying a publicly available Docker image](images/environment-other-custom-image.png)

At a minimum, the **Custom image** field must include both a name and a tag in
the form `NAME:TAG`.  There is no assumption that a name without a tag implies
the `latest` tag, so a tag must be supplied.

When the hostname of the image registry is not specified, it defaults to
`docker.io`, the canonical hostname of the official Docker registry.  Therefore,
the following 2 image identifiers are equivalent:

* `pangeo/pangeo-notebook:latest` (as shown in the screenshot above)
* `docker.io/pangeo/pangeo-notebook:latest` (including a registry hostname prefix)

> If you wish to use an image hosted in a regsistry other than `docker.io`, you

Reviewer 2: should we show a non-docker example? maybe @maxrjones has something stable on quay? or https://nmfs-opensci.github.io/container-images/

Author: Sure, I was thinking about that, so I'll grab one from the link you provided.

available Docker image that suits your needs, the **Environment** option **Build
your own image** provides a relatively easy and convenient means for building
and using your desired environment (image), without requiring knowledge of
Docker.

This option leverages the
[repo2docker](https://repo2docker.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html) tool to
handle the grunt work of building a custom Docker image for you, by allowing you
to **fully describe your desired image via files in a public code repository**.

::: {.callout-note}
Currently, the VEDA JupyterHub supports only **GitHub** as a repository provider
for use with repo2docker.
:::

### Describing Your Image

The beauty of leveraging **repo2docker** is that it will use the contents of a
public code repository (repo) to build a Docker image, doing all of the heavy
lifting for you.  You do not need to know how to write a `Dockerfile` because it
generates one for you.  Hence the name *repo2docker*.

In brief, repo2docker allows you to describe the following within a public
GitHub repository:

- A **list of dependencies** to install, specified via various files (such as

>   `environment.yml`, `requirements.txt`, or `apt.txt`, among others), and are

Reviewer 2: doesn't it also support install.R? should we elaborate more on when to use these, even the link in the supporting docs doesn't really explain

Author: Yes, install.R is supported, but I didn't want to repeat the entire list of files documented on repo2docker, which is why I added, "among others").

I agree that although repo2docker explains each file, it is not clear as to which files may or may not be mutually exclusive. For example, if there's an `environment.yml` file and a `requirements.txt` file, does one take precedence over the other, or are both used? I think both would be used, but haven't experimented, but it wouldn't really make sense for someone to include both. You only need one or the other, so it really is a matter of preference if nothing is  conda-only install.

I will try to provide a bit of clarity/guidance, but I also want to avoid putting too many details in the VEDA docs that perhaps should be in the repo2docker docs instead.

Reviewer 2: Agreed fixes to the repo2docker docs would make sense.

Reviewer 2: I just wanted to highlight the most common/recommended options we want users to know about environment.yml and install.R - all the "others" can be follow the link

Reviewer 2: we might also have to provide advice about R via conda vs not, since the would make use of environment.yml

  installed **in addition to** a [base set of dependencies].
- *Optionally*, a **post-build script** to run after all dependencies are
  installed (this must be named [postBuild])
- *Optionally*, a **pre-session script** to run each time you start a server
  with your image (this must be named [start])

Such files from your repository are used to construct a `Dockerfile` file on
your behalf, so you don't have to write one yourself, unless your really want
to.  If your repo contains a `Dockerfile`, repo2docker will ignore all other
files in your repo that it would otherwise use to generate a `Dockerfile`, and
simply use the `Dockerfile` from your repo.

For complete details on what repo2docker supports, see the following:

> - [Where to put configuration files]

Reviewer 2: Wondering if the order of links should be changed

Author: Do you have a suggestion? Are you thinking of reversing the first 2? Put the "what" before the "where"?

Reviewer 2: exactly, what before where

either of the following forms:

- **Full URL** (e.g., <https://github.com/binder-examples/conda>)
- **Namespace/name pair** (e.g., `binder-examples/conda`), where a namespace
  is either a GitHub *username* or *organization* (`binder-examples` in this
  example).

In the **Git Ref** field, if you want repo2docker to use the most recent
versions of files from the default branch of the repository (typically `main`),
then use the default value **HEAD** to indicate the most recent commit.
Alternatively, you may specify a **branch name**, a **tag**, or a specific
**commit identifier** to indicate a different commit for repo2docker to use.

Once you've specified both **Repository** and **Git Ref**, click the **Build
image** button to trigger repo2docker to build your image (which may take
several minutes), and you should see log messages appear below the **Build
image** button, similar to the following:

![Building a new image](images/build-logs-new-build-started.png)

Once your image is built, you should see something similar to this:

![Image build has finished](images/build-logs-new-build-finished.png)

The next time you click **Build image** for the same values of **Repository**

> and **Git Ref**, if the Git Ref refers to the same commit in the repository as

Reviewer 2: should we warn people against using 'latest' because it won't know the image has changed?

Author: Good idea. I'll add a warning about that.

Author: @wildintellect, I think you may be referring to the earlier section about using pre-build images vs. building a custom one in this section. Is that correct?

Either way, can you clarify?

If you're referring to the previous section, then I suspect that using "latest" actually would detect an image change, so that if the "latest" image changed since a previous environment launch, then a subsequent environment launch would use the newer image -- similar to how using "HEAD" here for Git Ref would cause a new custom image to be built if a new commit were pushed since the last build.

Author: It does check the repo for updates when you specify a ref that is not a specific commit. So using "HEAD" or a branch name will cause an image rebuild if the default (or specified) branch contains new commits since the last time the image was built. That's what this bit of the doc describes, although after re-reading, it could probably use a bit of rewording for better clarity.
